30 seconds for everybody to settle.
Thank you, Minister. We have one hour with you.
And so if you would like to start with some opening remarks, keeping them
brief, approximately three minutes.
Thank you.
Three minutes?
Three minutes.
Well, you can take less if you want.
Madam Chair,
I will do my introduction. So,
thank you very much for the opportunity to come before the committee and answer
some questions. We're
talking about communications.
Well, it says here media and communications, but we handled media yesterday, didn't
we?
Yeah.
This is communications.
Just communications.
Yeah.
Good.
So,
if we
step back and sort of look at infrastructure in New Zealand in general,
I think it's a fair
conclusion to draw that
our telecommunications infrastructure is,
I think, arguably our best or we're
best placed as a country in comparison with roads,
water, everything else.
And so that's a great thing. Partly as a result of the
efforts of private companies over a long period of time and
investment.
Partly because of the John Key-led
government's investment in ultra-fast broadband.
And as a result of that, New Zealand has
average broadband speeds above the
OECD average. And it's one of the few areas that we beat Australia
and Ireland and the United Kingdom in terms of average
broadband speed. So that's
a great
place to
rest on.
Well, not to rest on, a great place to be.
Fiber now reaches 88% of New Zealand's population.
And we've, over the last few years, invested 770 million
into rural connectivity,
in programs such as the Rural Broadband Initiative and the black spots, and we've
got people here that can talk about details if
required. So I suppose our primary goal then is,
when we think of where should we spend our next dollar on infrastructure in the
country, there are some other areas that are more
pressing.
But we need to ensure that our regulatory settings are tip-top
so that we don't fall off the pace and that we
build on the strong foundations that we have.
And so, we're making sure they've got the right incentives to support commercial
investment in telco markets,
removing unnecessary regulatory barriers and also providing for access to
the radio spectrum. We've got a couple of bills before you that you've
been considering. I just want to thank you for your
conduct there.
I don't know why I've been limited to three minutes because there's so much I want
to say, but- ... I'm happy to sort of move on to questions
at any point.
Thank you. We go to Ruben Davidson first.
Thank you, and thank you for being back again this afternoon, Minister, to
answer a slightly different train of questions.
Thank you.
Luckily, we've got lots, so we should be able to keep you busy for the balance of
57 minutes.
Good.
You're responsible for just under $41 million in revenue
from the sale of license rights to use radio spectrum, cost
'26, '27.
Yep.
How is that spectrum allocation expected to develop over the coming
years? And how do you think you'll ensure that the
spectrum is allocated in a way that promotes competition and supports
new entrants
rather than just entrenching existing operators?
Are you talking in terms of
telecommunications spectrum or radio?
No, radio spectrum.
Radio spectrum. Well, when I first sort of came
into the role, there was a strong desire across the
industry to get some certainty for the existing sort of levels of
spectrum, and
because it's very necessary for long-term investments.
And so we went through a process and we've
announced
that, and there's work to be done and we're
charging a lower... Well, there was a discussion around pricing,
and we reached an agreement on that, and so that has the ability
to provide options for people to carry on their work.
In terms of the ability for new people to come and
access spectrum,
that can be done, of course, through the purchasing of existing rights, but
also through the auction process.
I don't know if there's any more detail you want to add to that.
Sure. Kia ora koutou. James Hartley-
Oh, sorry
... from MBIE.
Sorry.
Sorry, just introducing myself. Grant Mitchell from NIFA as well.
And a very substantial MB team available.
Well, not that substantial, actually.
So,
maybe if I can just elaborate on that spectrum detail.
So I think there's a number of work streams on spectrum
of note for the committee. So,
one aspect is renewals of spectrum used for existing uses.
So that's where there are incumbents in the spectrum.
So what we weigh up
when we decide how to reallocate that spectrum is
just being fair to incumbents, whilst also trying to encourage
competition innovation as well.
So that's one aspect. There's also an ongoing program of releasing
new bands of spectrum into new uses.
So oftentimes you'll have an old use of spectrum that maybe some technology's died
or
things have moved on, and so we'll release new spectrum.
So
for example-
We're shortly going to be consulting with some spectrum
and the sort of lower 5G band effectively, which will probably be
available for WISPs and maybe private networks, which is a new kind of innovative
use of spectrum.
Obviously, satellites are
relatively new technology and
we've been doing a bit of work on releasing spectrum for that new technology as
well, which will be challenging for some incumbents as well in terms of the
competition in the market.
So
always balancing up incumbents
versus the new competition with an ongoing program of
spectrum.
Excellent. Thank you.
Yeah. Supplementary, Kushla.
Kia ora koutou. That said, one of the glaring figures is
the reduction in funding allocation for Maori spectrum.
Given that you're talking about growth,
has there been any consideration about, is the idea that what it is
now is what it will always be?
Has any thought given to how that could grow, particularly
given that
Maori broadcasting, a lot of iwi radio, for example, is highly non-commercial, not
for lack of trying, but for the regions and the access to advertising income, et
cetera, that they have. So has any thought been given about how
they can grow and expand?
There's a technical financial question in there which-
Yes
... shall I answer then-
Please
... I guess more?
So in terms of, you talked about the reduction in income.
So I think what that's referring to is,
you should be aware,
Credit Maori signed an MoU a few years ago on spectrum allocation,
and that committed a range of funding for a number
of different streams
over, I think, a four or five-year period.
So I think there's one tranche of that funding left, and that's why it's dropping
off. So
I think that drop-off you're seeing is the fulfillment of that MoU commitment.
I think it was around overall package of about $70 million
over a four or five-year period. So I think that explains the kind of
technical financial drop. I think you've got a broader policy question as
well.
Yeah, about growth. Yeah, growth.
Well, and the only point I'd make about that is, yep,
it was part of a period when money was
apparently freely available,
and is one of the reasons why, as we approach this
budget at the moment as a nation, we still,
notwithstanding all our savings efforts, are running at an $11
billion deficit this year.
And we inherited very substantial deficits two years ago.
And we're doing everything
we can to get back to surplus in
two to three years' time. And that requires some tough decisions.
So not everything that was funded during the
Jacinda Ardern,
Willie Jackson period necessarily can carry on at the
same levels because what we were doing there was
unsustainable.
So yep, there's lots of elements there that we could talk about.
Yeah, I guess to clarify, so we're talking about new technologies, growing
spectrum, continuing to sell it.
Without the capacity, what considerations are there so
that Maori broadcasting can participate in this growth
in these new technologies?
Well,
I
think that's probably an area
that my colleague Tama Potaka, in terms of who's responsible for Kara
Maori and the funding that goes to Maori broadcasting, which
is substantial, continues to be substantial.
But that's a sort of broader decision around it in terms of getting allocation
to spectrum to do that. They have
that. They also
go through online and they have various opportunities there.
But they have access to the spectrum that they need there.
I want to pick up on a point. In your
opening remarks, you talked about
connectivity and the network that we have across New Zealand, and you
referenced Prime Minister John Key in leading the
way and getting that work started.
We've invested $770 million since
2011 in that, in rural connectivity programs
specifically.
And that's expected to be substantially complete in the next two
years.
I'm wondering if you can provide some objective, measurable
data around coverage speeds and around
reliability that can demonstrate the
improvement that you will attribute to that investment.
But what I want to know is,
I want to see that without the impact of Haleos factored into
that. So based on the
infrastructure without Haleos operating.
Well,
I don't have that list on the exact
speeds in every particular town of the city.
Obviously, just for people tuning in,
those who are not interested in the soccer who are tuning into this
will remember,
as a country, we're rather blessed in the sense that 88% of New
Zealanders have access to fiber, which is the gold standard, fast,
great.
And with each sort of extra percentage of the population that you try and
extend fiber to because of the distances in rural New Zealand
becomes exponentially more expensive, and so there's a sort of a
limit to how far you can press that.
Then on top of that, there's
opportunities through cellular networks and
WISP opportunities and also the old use of copper.
And so we were putting extra resources into that, and we can give
an update to that. And
we've
been doing that for a decade or so.
And then,
in the meantime, at the lower
orbit
Satellites have become
available with Starlink, and which ended up
providing real very good access to
connectivity in the most remote spots.
And so that's sort of changed the game somewhat.
And so
before we keep on plowing more and more money into that
expansion of the rural broadband network, I think it's a very
sensible thing to stand back and take stock because people now have more options.
But you can perhaps give them an update on some of the
figures.
Well, if you look on where there is fiber, the average speeds are
just a bit below 500 megabits per second. So it's very fast.
Globally, you can buy up to a gigabit.
If you really want, you can buy up to eight gigabits.
That's across 412 towns in New Zealand, so right down to
very small towns, like 50 people. So yeah, a very, very good service.
Then if you go into the rural areas,
New Zealand at the moment, mobile voice coverage, so it
covers
everybody except for about 0.3% of population can access mobile voice
coverage in New Zealand. For 111,
another 0.3% of those can only access it from one carrier.
So very high mobile voice, and that's measured by where people actually live.
If you look at the state highways, which are quite important,
throughout New Zealand, that they effectively, how we define a mobile black
spot is can you get service from any carrier?
Because 111 and the broadcasts, civil defense alerts
go across all networks. So that's quite important to understand.
So
effectively, when some people say they're in a black spot, it's usually because one
commercial operator they're on might not cover that area.
So there's about 4.6% of state highways that don't have that at the moment, and
they are very remote areas. So it's quite a
small percentage that we actually
don't have covered now, and
of those are covered is about a little under 3% that only have one operator.
So sometimes you might be driving along and you're with Spark or One and the call
drops.
That's probably largely because they don't have the overlapping coverage.
And the way why we really understand this now, because emergency services for our
public safety network initiative, they have dual roaming between the two
major carriers, which is One and Spark, and an average police
officer in a month will have 23 roaming incidents.
So there's about 400,000 to 500,000 roaming instances between the emergency
services, and we've got about 27,000 on that network.
So it tells you that the commercial networks don't necessarily overlap.
But as far as we're concerned at the government, the most important thing is can
people access 111? Can you get a broadcast cell alert to know to
evacuate? And they are the main important things there.
And on the rural sort of area, we currently have all of our eyes
effectively connected to broadband.
We've upgraded services to about 86,000
rural households that had very poor coverage.
So they're getting a terrestrially, a minimum of 25, many of them up to 50,
and we upgraded capacity to about another 70,000 as well.
And there's currently a total of about 578
mobile towers rurally being deployed that has all three carriers, and that's going
up to about 597, and that includes places as remote as
the Chatham Islands.
Past very quite remote places as well.
And the challenge is now because we've put so much mobile out there, in the West
Coast before we started, there were like five mobile towers.
Now there's lots of them. People notice the black spots more because they get used
to it more. So they notice there's a little 500 meter or a kilometer thing, and
they complain. But you can't literally get coverage 100% everywhere, particularly
in New Zealand. But I think, having-
Well, there is a prospect in a couple of years-
Yeah, with the satellite
... with the satellite where, unless you're caving-
Yes
... you will have.
That's right. So between those technologies, having
traveled recently, we do have very good mobile service compared to some of our
Western counterparts, I have to say, and
spectacular
fiber broadband.
Yes.
We are very lucky.
Yeah.
So that
12% figure that you talked about, 88% coverage, that means
there's 12% not.
Yes.
So-
That's right. That's with the fiber.
Yeah.
Without them.
So is that a
wait for
other providers, or is that a commitment to getting fiber to them at some
stage, or is that a-
Well, look,
to the extent that
there are new subdivisions in urban areas, then there'll be a commercial
rationale for doing that.
Then
it will happen. But as we get into the more remote
areas,
the
obvious sort of weighing up that we're doing as government is
in terms of the
priority listing for the next dollar to be spent on infrastructure in the broadest
sense.
As I said, we've got real pressures in a lot of areas.
And it gets exponentially more expensive
with fiber the further you go into
rural areas.
And
as is obvious for everybody to see at the moment, the technology
is providing other solutions
through satellites, and also cellular connectivity,
which may be a more efficient way of doing it.
And so, we don't have plans at the moment
for government-funded expansion of
the fiber.
So that's where it is at the moment.
Mm-hmm.
There are some private providers who actually are building things to small little
centers like Primo and Taranaki-
Yeah. Yeah. Well, it makes sense
... and other places, and they're doing that themselves at quite a low cost.
But when you've got a, average household has about an 18 to 20 meter
frontage in an urban area. Some of them are less than that.
In a rural Where a farm could have a five-kilometer frontage.
So, the cost to deploy five Ks versus 80 meters
is, you literally just do the maths, it's very expensive.
Yeah.
And you don't really get the trade-off benefit compared to the satellite, which can
do about 150 megabits per second easily on satellite.
So that infrastructure's great, right, for 88% of the
country at the moment with-
Mm-hmm
... with the climate being what it is and everything behaving itself.
Mm-hmm.
But we're seeing an increasing trend of things not behaving
themselves as far as the weather's concerned, and we know we've got a rather
large fault line running through,
well, most of the country.
What's the modeling, what's the planning in place for
an unwanted but potential natural hazard or event that's
hugely disruptive to the fiber network?
So what's the plan to build back, or the modeling to build back, and what's
the interim plan?
Well,
there's been some ongoing and continued
investment in
battery storage for the cellular network
in the regions there. We can go through the details of that if you'd like.
I'm more meaning just in relation to the fiber network.
Well, on the fiber network, um.
Wonder if time Graham might be able to talk to you in terms of
procurement, I suppose, because- Well, the fiber network,
A, they're all owned by private providers, right?
So they'll have their own insurance arrangements.
But if you actually look at the Christchurch earthquake that happened quite a few
years ago, there was a fiber network in Christchurch, and the fiber
actually still operated quite well.
It's quite flexible because it all sits in a little tube, so it can take quite a
bit of movement. You will get breakages and things like that, but the whole
thing won't disappear.
And the Christchurch earthquake, which I visited post-earthquake to look at the
network, was actually in quite good shape.
So it's not like a water network or anything like that.
It actually is quite flexible. Some of the network's on poles, so obviously if the
pole goes down, they have to put it back up again and things like that.
But the private operators, that's what their job is. They do that.
They have to look after the network. We're not self-insuring.
We're not insuring their network.
They insure that with private insurers or take their own
cover.
Yeah. And there hasn't been any work to collate
or liaise with those private providers to see what plans they've got
in place, given the importance of that infrastructure?
Well,
look, I'm sure it's part of the
normal expectations of
them for their customers.
And what we focus on is some of the allied
areas, such as the cellphone networks, and some battery
storage there. Of course, satellite changes
the situation again. And over the next few years,
as the increasing uptake of
that and the linking with the cellular network, the
most important thing I think people will be thinking about in terms of
emergencies in the future is having a torch, but also having a power bank
available, because as long as you've got power on your cellphone,
there will be real opportunities for connectivity through satellites.
And so, I think
when it comes to responding to natural disasters,
technology is providing hugely
beneficial opportunities for us to be able to cope and respond.
Mm-hmm. I could just add as well, I think in some of the previous Crown
investments into fiber network,
we have deliberately
closed some loops and networks to make sure that, if one point in the
circuit is broken, there's another
pathway in.
Graham and his team have been quite active in that regard
in the past as well.
All right. Kushna.
You mentioned marae connectivity.
Yep.
You know, 98%'s great.
Mm-hmm.
How many marae does the 2% represent, and is the goal 100?
Particularly given
how widely celebrated marae have been as response hubs, resilience
hubs for everyone.
The 98%
is not good enough for the-
Well, not if you need to, you've been evacuated from your house.
My understanding is that all marae that wanted to be connected-
All marae that want to be connected are connected or in the process of.
Those 2% are generally- The last ones are being connected.
Some just didn't want to be connected.
But, you know, we- Old school ... we basically found most of them.
There were a few in some of the areas that we were in where they didn't want to
work with TPK for some reason, Tukui, so we went in there directly
through the iwi and iwi-affiliated tribes to actually get them connected
in the Tairāwhiti, for example.
Yeah.
And now they're all connected. So
it's actually quite hard to find some that aren't connected, but that's a voluntary
choice of theirs.
We can't make them be connected. But there's currently 682
connected, and when we finish the refurbishments, it'll be
698. Because we're also, through other programs, we're rebuilding
seven marae that were devastated through the cyclone as well.
So obviously they are not connected at the moment. They will be connected.
And there's some others who are doing refurbishments and things like that,
which we're just waiting for them to be connected.
Can you tell us why some people didn't want to join?
Well, you can speculate on that, but it's something about Big Brother and all that
sort of stuff.
Oh, okay.
Which is unfounded of course, but there was some of that sort of stuff going on.
Yeah. But it was very small.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, literally very small. Of course, that was during the period of the previous
government. Yes, that's right.
I think they didn't want to be connected to the podium of truth. That's right.
And, um. But as you know, all the ones that have been connected have been using it,
and they find
it highly beneficial. And we've used it to connect the water treatment plants as
well, so they can be remote controlled as well.
Mm-hmm.
We can really-
So, yeah. Rugan, again. Yeah.
A new primary here really, but it picks up on some of the themes we've already
discussed, but it also explores the theme that you've referenced today and
yesterday around a single source.
Yeah.
And that is around the-
You've talked about earlier the ability for, in an emergency response
environment, for us to rely heavily on low Earth orbit tech,
which currently means relying on one supplier,
potentially another, but that
hasn't eventuated yet. It's forecast to start
any day, but depending on who you talk to.
I guess the question here is,
to what extent are you tracking the share of
connectivity that depends entirely on Starlink, and that's
including through domestic providers?
Well, I
don't think we would be relying entirely on that other than to
say we've got a very strong fiber network.
We've got very strong mobile networks, and
a certain number of those
critical towers in places that are prone to natural disasters, having better
battery storage. And then on top of that, you do have the
satellite option. So,
I think that's a good foundation
on which to build. But we continue to make investments, as I say, in
the batteries
for extra storage. I think there's some recent
examples where that's extended the life of the tower
substantially to 19 hours, and in sometimes
cases getting through
without going down. So, it's
using different tools available.
But the fundamental point is, of course, to the extent to which you
can...
It depends what natural disaster you're talking about, of course.
Yeah.
If you're talking about a solar storm, then maybe the satellites might not be the
best ones.
Yeah. The natural disasters I've lived through certainly took longer than 19 hours
to recover from.
That's because battery programs are fully rolled out at this stage.
Yeah, sorry.
We're putting
additional batteries into key cell sites to give them a target 24-hour
resilience.
Yeah.
So if there's an event, people can call 111, they can get the
emergency cell broadcast if they've got to evacuate, if you think about the
cyclones, or they can call their families.
After that, the mobile operators can react and put gen sets in
and things like that to keep them going longer.
But the critical-
Gen set?
Generators.
Yes.
Generators, yes.
That's what the people do.
That's right.
Generators.
You're watching the soccer.
And in relation to how many people are connected to cell, the Commerce Commission
does do reporting on about how many people are connected by technology.
Yeah.
And it's on their website.
So the stat I've seen is 40% of our landmass is
through LEOs, so through low Earth orbit for
that connectivity.
So that's a single operator providing coverage for 40% of
that service.
Of landmass.
Yeah.
Not of-
Well, considering that-
Individual providers
... considering that 33% of our landmass is in the Docker State and those
hills-
Oh
... that's plausible. Yes, we don't have broadband right through the Docker
State. But there's, I mean, we're-
That's right.
Are you comfortable with that situation in New Zealand where we have a single
provider?
Well, what would your alternative be?
Are you suggesting that the government-
Well, I'm asking you. You're the minister.
We don't have any plans to set up our own satellite company, government-owned, at
this stage. But
we're obviously hopeful that there will be, and there is talk of competition,
and that would, of course, be most welcome.
But
I suppose where we'll be getting most of the competition is between the various
different
technologies available in New Zealand.
But
for a very long period of time, people in those remote areas had no choices
and no options. And so the good news is that we're having more and more
options. And we need to because, a modern dynamic
economy,
access to good
connectivity is critical.
They do have access to voice calling. As I said, I think like 0.3% do not.
Yeah.
And I think when you look at it, a satellite-
That's the population rather than-
That's right
... the square rate.
That's right. And when you-
You're talking about the square rate.
And I think
satellite covers 100% of the country.
There's about 36%, roughly, that we don't have terrestrial mobile coverage on.
But obviously, that includes farms and
Southern Alps, Fiordland, all that-
Yes
... vast amount of land which we're not really going to cover.
But increasingly-
Mm
... increasingly that rural connectivity,
or the lack of rural connectivity, or the fact that there is a reliance on one
operator for that rural connectivity has an impact, right?
Because field days last week, we see in all of the
conversations we have with our rural sector, an increased use of tech
in those environments.
Yes.
Mm.
And potentially, either a lack of connectivity or a
reliance on one provider for that connectivity.
Yeah, but I think the point we're making for the vast majority
of the farmed area, you've got access
to,
as well as cellular tech connectivity at the moment, still some of them got access
to copper, but there's cellular, there's WISP, and there's
satellites. And hopefully, there'll be more competition amongst the satellites.
So,
I think the opportunities for choice are much better than they've ever been
before.
And that's why, in essence, what we're trying to do as governments to
make sure our regulations are
well designed so as to maximize
private sector investment to improve that over time,
which is what we're seeing.
So you don't have any concerns for that single operator model, which is what we've
got currently. You don't have any concerns around sovereignty?
Well, obviously, I'd like to see more competition and
we'd be welcoming that.
So that's different to being comfortable with the current situation.
You can want more competition, but do you think-
I'm never comfortable. We're always looking for more things, and we're always
looking to reach higher and to do better.
You're not looking for more investment in this portfolio by the look of it
Well,
we are continuing to make some investments in terms
of emergency responses. But the period of
very substantial government investment in the ultra-fast broadband
and the rural connectivity has
come to an end for the time being. And obviously, future governments will make
future decisions about
when and where it's appropriate to pick up that level of
investment. The point I'm making, which I think is
a pragmatic and sensible one, is given the dramatic
changes in technological options that have opened up in the last
few years, it is worth taking a stop before making major
new investments in the other choices
available,
as we see what we hope we'll see, continuing more competition
developing.
Good. All right. I'll jump in here now.
So while you guys are thinking of more questions.
The $4 million in the budget, Minister, that is to lift resilience of
cellular towers. Is it just to cope with natural disasters, which you have
talked about before, or is there something about the condition
of these cellular towers that we should be aware of where that money is going
to go?
It's all power resilience. It's batteries, effectively.
Yeah. That's it. That's the-
And the government also has got 2.4 million in this
year's allocation that's-
Yeah, four million. That's what I'm asking. Yeah.
The four million-
So 6.4 in total.
Okay.
Yeah.
So
is there a particular region that requires most investment from that?
The approach that's been taken is we look at the towers, the mobile towers, that
frequently have power outages.
So you can pick regions like Northland, Eastland,
areas like-
East Cape
... East Cape, things like that, and then focusing on the mobile towers that
actually cover population within those remote
locations, and then putting the batteries into those.
So it's about 350 that we're targeting, and some of those
we've already got underway at the moment as well.
So we already have-
Okay
...
a number already actually deployed out there as well.
So will that funding be sufficient?
Pardon?
Will that funding be sufficient for all these towers?
It's the contribution that we're making at the moment.
And
like I say,
future governments will make future decisions about further
investments.
And we've got some co-funding from the sector on this last round, so the sector's
actually putting in 50% funding.
So, we got about 100 covered at the moment.
So you think about isolated places like, you remember Rissington during the cyclone
was isolated. Its cell tower went down. People didn't know what was happening.
So that's now got 24-hour support.
So in that event, the residents can call, they can get emergency services,
they can get emergency service alerts and things like that.
Okay.
Quite a few to the East Coast. Napier, Taihape, Road Arrow all getting better
resilience towers because that's unfortunately where there was life lost there
during the event as well. So that's the sort of prioritization.
We're seeing technology
start to solve this problem more and more as well with the directed device from
satellites. So I think some networks you can already text
when you're outside cellphone coverage or in disasters, and
networks have plans to roll out voice to phone
coverage from satellites
over the next couple of years. So I think in terms of natural
disaster recovery, that's a real game changer.
350 is a lot, because you've got to remember, there's a lot of mobile towers in New
Zealand, but they duplicate themselves.
So we're only focusing on non-duplicated towers.
Okay.
So, it's a lot. It's about a third of the unique mobile towers
in New Zealand. So it's a lot.
That's a lot. Dr. David Wilson.
Just in terms of terrestrial fiber, subsidy cable
between North Island and South Island is one, as I understand. Is that correct?
I think there might be-
There's two.
There's a couple. One goes off the west coast as well.
One goes across, right, and then there's the ones that the Transpower has under
with the power cables.
Okay. That gives me some more confidence.
Yeah.
Because I'm a bit worried that if they were going to cut the power cable-
Yeah
... between us and the South Island.
That's right. And I think there's more than one Transpower cable off the top of my
head.
Yeah. That's good to know. Thank you.
All right. We go back to Ruben Davidson.
Thank you.
I've got a relatively technical question here.
It's not actually. Yep.
Pardon?
A relatively technical question here, so I'm going to read a large part of it.
The country's primary export industries now depend on connectivity that runs
through a single foreign provider,
on terms that can be changed without notice that no New Zealand authority can
compel. A recent industry commissioned report, this is the Flint
Global March 2026, paragraph
53, identifies national security or digital
sovereignty considerations as risks of satellite-based
networks. The analysis to quantify that exposure has not been
done,
and the situation is now forming faster than the absence of analysis
can be corrected. Is that of concern to you? Do you think it should be?
Well,
I think what we've seen over the last few years is
a global provider come in and offer a service that
is of great value to a number of New Zealanders who have
purchased it. Nobody's forced them to do it.
They've done it because it's better than anything they've had available to
them
at that point. And so, I would have thought that's a good thing, and
not something that we want to get in the way of.
Yes, it's not something that New Zealand owns or controls,
so that is a difference.
But again, I put to you what is
your suggestion? We're not
proposing for a New Zealand government entity to
start their own satellite network.
So we could regulate,
and there are elements that can be considered there, but obviously
we want to be careful about doing that because we want to ensure that New
Zealanders continue to have access to
this game-changing technology.
And there's been a lot of discussions about a second
provider entering the field, and that would be welcome.
But
fundamentally what's happened is that-
A company has come along offering a new service, using a new technology that
a lot of New Zealanders are using, and it's providing much better connectivity than
they've ever had in the past. And I think that's a good thing.
So there's nothing else that you think you need to do in that space, too?
Well, we look at the system as a whole.
And we want to ensure that New Zealanders have access to the best
connectivity.
And ultimately,
as I said at the start, we've 88% of New Zealanders having access to
fiber, which is the gold standard in terms of speed
of
downloading and uploading.
Then that's great, and we want to continue to build on that.
Right. We have supplementary from Dr. Vanessa Wiening.
Thank you, Minister. Do you think it's the role of the government
to provide all of the funding and support
for the infrastructure, or do you think there's other ways that it can be achieved?
Well,
no.
Obviously,
the majority of investment in telecom's infrastructure
has been done through the private sector, and we've got three
cellular companies and a number of other companies involved in
fiber and
whisper, the
internet-based,
Wi-Fi based internet. And so,
and many other areas. And, so the primary sort
of public focus is to ensure that the regulatory settings are
encouraging of continued investment.
And that's good. And if you were to contrast that with many other areas of
investment, some of which are dominated more by local
government or central government, I think this is an area that has done very well.
And I think the private sector engagement in that is a big part of it.
And so, Minister, do you think that what the sector has been asking for has
been more of that regulatory relief and to
make sure that those requirements are fixed
and are favorable rather than necessarily looking what the funding
allocations are?
Yeah. Well, the regulatory tension that we often face is,
particularly in the allocation of spectrum and things like that-
Mm
... is to ensure that investments
have been made are not unduly
affected by
subsequent decisions. And so there's investment certainty.
But we're also concerned that we want to see plenty of competition and new entrants
coming into the field, and so we balance those two things.
Okay.
There's also been,
I think obviously we keep a pretty close eye on the regulatory system.
Mm-hmm.
I think there have been a couple of bills through this committee-
Yeah
... recently as well, which I think we reported back over the last couple of
months.
Mm-hmm.
Which make a handful of regulatory-
Yeah
... tweaks and changes.
Mm-hmm.
And I want to thank the committee for their-
Oh, yeah. I was going to like-
... for their-
... giving you both a nice for that
... contribution.
It's been a real pleasure.
Yeah.
Dr. Hamish Campbell.
Yes, and actually it's probably led on to probably what my primary question was
going to be is, Minister, what's your approach to the
telecommunications regulations, which will create a more
competitive and resilient digital environment that will support
economic growth and innovation for businesses and households in
New Zealand?
Yes. Well,
what
we try aspire to achieve is a measure of
regulatory certainty,
and then regulatory
restraint.
And so a big part of the wider government effort in terms of
RMA reform,
and this thing called Neststep,
which is the rules in relation to putting up cellphone towers.
All of that we consider in the light of trying to make it easier for
people to do things, and less expensive
in a regulatory sense, while always preserving the
rights of New Zealanders to have a say on what goes on in their broader
environment within reasonable bounds.
And so, we're trying to get that setting right.
We've got the
Telecommunications Commissioner who acts as a sort of a watch which
is, and that process through the Commerce Commissioner has been subject of some
reform, but we think is good sound framework in place.
And then
over the last few years, the government has
taken a role in investing in the rollout of the ultra-fast broadband and
rural broadband initiatives. But
fundamentally,
it's very much a private sector-based
sector. And the good news is that people continue to
invest significantly in New Zealand,
and we want to keep it that way.
Great. Hoover Anderson.
Thank you. One of the areas that is often overlooked and
in this part of the examination is
the funding and services for deaf, hearing impaired, and speech impaired people.
And I see
that that's forecast to decrease going
into '26, '27. But I'm also
conscious that there's a
tender process underway currently for New Zealand Relay Services.
And there's been, as you're probably aware, some concern around
the lack of communication and pace,
or not the lack of pace, but the pace of that consultation process,
particularly given the stakeholders who may want to engage with it.
And I'm just curious as to whether you've had those concerns
raised as I have, and what, if anything, you're prepared to do to ensure
that there's a quality consultation process that happens there, and
that the stakeholders that should be involved are able to be engaged with.
Well, the short answer is yes, I have heard those concerns raised.
And James might be able to-
Yeah, sure
... put more detail on that.
A few answers just on the funding decrease.
That's really a consequence of the timing of the procurement project, so the
sequencing of when the spin happens.
So it's not a reduction in the funding on the service or the quality of the
service.
We take that feedback
from the sector extremely seriously.
We're very conscious about who we're providing the service for, and we want to make
sure we get that consultation right with those community members.
So,
yes, we will be working closely with them to, yeah, address their
concerns.
So is that an extra effort or is that an
extension to the consultation window?
I think there'll be an extra effort.
I think there's plenty of time in this process to do more engagement.
But we want to make sure we hear directly from the community as well.
So we'll be reaching out to them.
Sure. And how's that come about, given that you've spoken about the
fact that you are really conscious of that community, and given that they do
have additional challenges with engaging with a lot of
government process and official process?
How's that eventuated in this event?
I'm not completely sure.
I
guess from here we can say we will make sure we will engage with the community
fully,
and yeah, address their concerns.
Sure. And Minister, specifically, I'm curious what you might be able to do
to
rectify the issues that have arisen through this process.
Well, look, I've got every confidence
in the ministry's processes here.
But it sounds like the feedback I have is people feel like they're being
rushed.
And
so the first step, of course, is just to ...
One of the good things about being in New Zealand is it's a relatively small place,
and people can have direct conversations, and
see
what we can agree. And if we need to
change the way we're doing it, we can consider that.
But I'm sure we'll find a way through.
So would you consider an extension to the consultation window?
Well,
yes, I will consider it. I'm not going to
commit to it because we've also got
things that people are waiting on.
But
we can take some time to look through that if we can.
Good. Looks like, yep.
Oh, Ruben Nevinson, more questions?
Yeah.
On this primary, is it?
Oh, well-
We still have time. Yep.
Can be.
Let's carry on.
We've got so much time and so much we-
Oh, come on. Come on. Yeah. Thank you.
There's pages here we haven't got through yet.
Yeah. Quickly.
I'm interested in the
AM frequency
and the,
well, I guess as an opening question, what you see as the future of the AM
frequency in New Zealand.
Well,
it still carries on doing its thing.
We had up in Auckland, there were two big masts and
now there's going to be one big mast.
And still there are people who tune in, and
it still has a place.
Not perhaps as much as it used to. I don't know about you, but I tend to listen to
things on my phone through
the internet rather than through a Wi-Fi.
And a lot of people through AM or FM, but people in their cars
often obviously still do. So it still has a place.
Particularly in emergencies and for resilience.
Yes.
So
any thoughts on that? You're saying it still has a
place. That doesn't determine whether you think you need to continue investment
in that infrastructure to ensure it's available as a resilience tool.
Well,
there's
one step
removed, but Radio New Zealand have invested in
putting in a very substantial new tower in Auckland.
So
they obviously see the
value in doing that,
and I support that.
Just with regards to those radio towers in Auckland that have come down.
Yes.
They obviously had a large footprint, much larger than the tower at the ground
level. So there's a part-
There was the wires. There were sort of wires coming out.
Yes, there... Well, hopefully. Otherwise, the function would've been somewhat
compromised.
Yes.
But they did sit on about seven hectares of land.
What are the plans for that piece of land?
Well, that's a
matter that
RNZ are
working through. And
so they're still keeping one.
Where the second one was will become available, and my understanding that
arrangements have been made for that to
be
used. I'm just not quite sure what is publicly available or not, actually.
I might just need to check that before I
speak about it. But it'll
continue to serve a useful purpose.
So if the disposal or sale of that land generated revenue-
Yes
... for the property owner-
... the landowner-
Yes
... Radio New Zealand in this instance.
Yes.
That would look to me like a
sizable
piece of funding that could be reinvested back into a potentially
under-resourced state broadcaster.
Well,
if any money was realized, well, then there would naturally be a
discussion between the broadcaster and the
government about what should stay with the broadcaster and what should
come back to the people of New Zealand.
And there would be that discussion.
Sure. So you're open to some or all of those funds going directly back into Radio
New Zealand.
Well, it's not just a matter of me being open to it, it is also a matter of the
Minister of Finance being into it as well.
And so, we'll be having those discussions.
Oh, okay. But you're not ruling out that some or all of those funds could go back
to Radio New Zealand?
I'm not ruling anything in or out.
Well, I can rule out not all of it being kept by
a particular broadcaster. Yes, I could rule that out.
But certainly, there's a discussion to be had about
exactly what happens with the proceeds.
Okay. So looks like that's all. Thank you so much,
Minister. There might be some written questions, follow-up questions.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, everyone.
Thank you.